docs/how-to/wireguard-vpn/common-tasks.md, before:

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    description: Control WireGuard VPN interfaces with systemd, enable automatic startup, and manage VPN connections using systemctl commands.
---

(common-tasks-in-wireguard-vpn)=
# Common tasks in WireGuard VPN

Here are some common tasks and other useful tips that can help you in your WireGuard deployment.

## Controlling the WireGuard interface with systemd

The `wg-quick` tool is a simple way to bring the WireGuard interface up and down. That control is also exposed via a systemd service, which means the standard `systemctl` tool can be used.

Probably the greatest benefit of this is that it gives you the ability to configure the interface to be brought up automatically on system boot. For example, to configure the `wg0` interface to be brought up at boot, run the following command:

```bash
sudo systemctl enable wg-quick@wg0
```

The name of the systemd service follows the WireGuard interface name, and multiple such services can be enabled/started at the same time.  You can also use the `systemctl status`, `start`, `stop`, `reload` and `restart` commands to control the WireGuard interface and query its status:

```bash
sudo systemctl reload wg-quick@wg0
```

The `reload` action does exactly what we expect: it reloads the configuration of the interface without disrupting existing WireGuard tunnels. To add or remove peers, `reload` is sufficient, but if `wg-quick` options, such as `PostUp`, `Address`, or similar are changed, then a `restart` is needed.

## DNS resolving

Let's say when you are inside the home network (literally -- at home), you can connect to your other systems via {term}`DNS` names, because your router at `10.10.10.1` can act as an internal DNS server. It would be nice to have this capability also when connected via the WireGuard VPN.

To do that, we can add a `PostUp` command to the WireGuard configuration to run a command for us right after the VPN is established. This command can be anything you would run in a shell (as root). We can use that to adjust the DNS resolver configuration of the laptop that is remotely connected to the home network.

For example, if we have a WireGuard setup as follows:

* `home0` WireGuard interface.
* `.home` DNS domain for the remote network.
* `10.10.10.1/24` is the DNS server for the `.home` domain, reachable after the VPN is established.

We can add this `PostUp` command to the `home0.conf` configuration file to have our systemd-based resolver use `10.10.10.1` as the DNS server for any queries for the `.home` domain:

```bash
[Interface]
...
PostUp = resolvectl dns %i 10.10.10.1; resolvectl domain %i \~home
```

For `PostUp` (and `PostDown` -- see the {manpage}`wg-quick(8)` manual page for details), the `%i` text is replaced with the WireGuard interface name. In this case, that would be `home0`.

These two `resolvectl` commands tell the local *systemd-resolved* resolver to:
* associate the DNS server at `10.10.10.1` to the `home0` interface, and
* associate the `home` domain to the `home0` interface.

When you bring the `home0` WireGuard interface up again, it will run the `resolvectl` commands:

```bash
sudo wg-quick up home0
```

Will look like:

```text
[#] ip link add home0 type wireguard
[#] wg setconf home0 /dev/fd/63
[#] ip -4 address add 10.10.11.2/24 dev home0
[#] ip link set mtu 1420 up dev home0
[#] ip -4 route add 10.10.10.0/24 dev home0
[#] resolvectl dns home0 10.10.10.1; resolvectl domain home0 \~home
```

You can verify that it worked by pinging some {term}`hostname` in your home network, or checking the DNS resolution status for the `home0` interface:

```bash
resolvectl status home0
```

reports:

```text
Link 26 (home0)
    Current Scopes: DNS
         Protocols: -DefaultRoute +LLMNR -mDNS -DNSOverTLS DNSSEC=no/unsupported
Current DNS Server: 10.10.10.1
       DNS Servers: 10.10.10.1
        DNS Domain: ~home
```

If you are using `systemctl` to control the WireGuard interface, this is the type of change (adding or changing `PostUp`) where the `reload` action won't be enough, and you actually need to issue a `restart`.

```{note}
The {manpage}`wg-quick(8)` manual page documents the DNS setting of the WireGuard interface which has the same purpose, but only works if you have `resolveconf` installed. Ubuntu systems by default don't, and rely on `systemd-resolved` instead.
```

## Adding another peer

To add another peer to an existing WireGuard setup, we have to:

1. Generate a new keypair for the new peer
1. Create a new `[Peer]` section on the "other side" of the WireGuard setup
1. Pick a new IP for the new peer

Let's call the new system `ontheroad`, and generate the keys for it:

```bash
$ umask 077
$ wg genkey > ontheroad-private.key
$ wg pubkey < ontheroad-private.key > ontheroad-public.key
$ ls -la ontheroad.*
-rw------- 1 ubuntu ubuntu 45 Aug 22 20:12 ontheroad-private.key
-rw------- 1 ubuntu ubuntu 45 Aug 22 20:13 ontheroad-public.key
```

As for its IP address, let's pick `10.10.11.3/24` for it, which is the next one in the sequence from one of the previous examples in our WireGuard guide:

```
[Interface]
PrivateKey = <contents-of-ontheroad-private.key>
ListenPort = 51000
Address = 10.10.11.3/24

[Peer]
PublicKey = <contents-of-router-public.key>
Endpoint = <home-ppp0-IP-or-hostname>:51000
AllowedIPs = 10.10.11.0/24,10.10.10.0/24
```

The only difference between this config and one for an existing system in this same WireGuard setup will be `PrivateKey` and `Address`.

On the "other side", we add the new `[Peer]` section to the existing config:

```
[Interface]
PrivateKey = <contents-of-router-private.key>
ListenPort = 51000
Address = 10.10.11.1/24

[Peer]
# laptop
PublicKey = <contents-of-laptop-public.key>
AllowedIPs = 10.10.11.2

[Peer]
# ontheroad
PublicKey = <contents-of-ontheroad-public.key>
AllowedIPs = 10.10.11.3
```

To update the interface with the new peer without disrupting existing connections, we use the `reload` action of the systemd unit:

```bash
systemctl reload wg-quick@wg0
```

```{note}
For this case of a "server" or "VPN gateway", where we are just adding another peer to an existing config, the `systemctl reload` action will work well enough to insert the new peer into the WireGuard configuration. However, it won't create new routes, or do any of the other steps that `wg-quick` does. Depending on your setup, you might need a full restart so that `wg-quick` can fully do its job.
```

## Adding a smartphone peer

WireGuard can be installed on many different platforms, and smartphones are included. The [upstream installation page](https://www.wireguard.com/install/) has links for Android and for iOS apps.

Such a mobile client can be configured more easily with the use of QR codes.

We start by creating the new peer's config normally, as if it were any other system (generate keys, pick an IP address, etc). Then, to convert that configuration file to a QR code, install the `qrencode` package:

```bash
sudo apt install qrencode
```

Next, run the following command (assuming the config was written to `phone.conf`):

```bash
cat phone.conf | qrencode -t ansiutf8
```

That will generate a QR code in the terminal, ready for scanning with the smartphone app. Note that there is no need for a graphical environment, and this command can be run remotely over SSH for example.

Note that you need to put the private key contents directly into that configuration file, and not use `PostUp` to load it from a separate file.

```{important}
Treat this QR code as a secret, as it contains the private key for the WireGuard interface!
```

Commit message:

wireguard: which config format for phone
Signed-off-by: Christian Ehrhardt <christian.ehrhardt@canonical.com>

docs/how-to/wireguard-vpn/common-tasks.md, after:

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    description: Control WireGuard VPN interfaces with systemd, enable automatic startup, and manage VPN connections using systemctl commands.
---

(common-tasks-in-wireguard-vpn)=
# Common tasks in WireGuard VPN

Here are some common tasks and other useful tips that can help you in your WireGuard deployment.

## Controlling the WireGuard interface with systemd

The `wg-quick` tool is a simple way to bring the WireGuard interface up and down. That control is also exposed via a systemd service, which means the standard `systemctl` tool can be used.

Probably the greatest benefit of this is that it gives you the ability to configure the interface to be brought up automatically on system boot. For example, to configure the `wg0` interface to be brought up at boot, run the following command:

```bash
sudo systemctl enable wg-quick@wg0
```

The name of the systemd service follows the WireGuard interface name, and multiple such services can be enabled/started at the same time.  You can also use the `systemctl status`, `start`, `stop`, `reload` and `restart` commands to control the WireGuard interface and query its status:

```bash
sudo systemctl reload wg-quick@wg0
```

The `reload` action does exactly what we expect: it reloads the configuration of the interface without disrupting existing WireGuard tunnels. To add or remove peers, `reload` is sufficient, but if `wg-quick` options, such as `PostUp`, `Address`, or similar are changed, then a `restart` is needed.

## DNS resolving

Let's say when you are inside the home network (literally -- at home), you can connect to your other systems via {term}`DNS` names, because your router at `10.10.10.1` can act as an internal DNS server. It would be nice to have this capability also when connected via the WireGuard VPN.

To do that, we can add a `PostUp` command to the WireGuard configuration to run a command for us right after the VPN is established. This command can be anything you would run in a shell (as root). We can use that to adjust the DNS resolver configuration of the laptop that is remotely connected to the home network.

For example, if we have a WireGuard setup as follows:

* `home0` WireGuard interface.
* `.home` DNS domain for the remote network.
* `10.10.10.1/24` is the DNS server for the `.home` domain, reachable after the VPN is established.

We can add this `PostUp` command to the `home0.conf` configuration file to have our systemd-based resolver use `10.10.10.1` as the DNS server for any queries for the `.home` domain:

```bash
[Interface]
...
PostUp = resolvectl dns %i 10.10.10.1; resolvectl domain %i \~home
```

For `PostUp` (and `PostDown` -- see the {manpage}`wg-quick(8)` manual page for details), the `%i` text is replaced with the WireGuard interface name. In this case, that would be `home0`.

These two `resolvectl` commands tell the local *systemd-resolved* resolver to:
* associate the DNS server at `10.10.10.1` to the `home0` interface, and
* associate the `home` domain to the `home0` interface.

When you bring the `home0` WireGuard interface up again, it will run the `resolvectl` commands:

```bash
sudo wg-quick up home0
```

Will look like:

```text
[#] ip link add home0 type wireguard
[#] wg setconf home0 /dev/fd/63
[#] ip -4 address add 10.10.11.2/24 dev home0
[#] ip link set mtu 1420 up dev home0
[#] ip -4 route add 10.10.10.0/24 dev home0
[#] resolvectl dns home0 10.10.10.1; resolvectl domain home0 \~home
```

You can verify that it worked by pinging some {term}`hostname` in your home network, or checking the DNS resolution status for the `home0` interface:

```bash
resolvectl status home0
```

reports:

```text
Link 26 (home0)
    Current Scopes: DNS
         Protocols: -DefaultRoute +LLMNR -mDNS -DNSOverTLS DNSSEC=no/unsupported
Current DNS Server: 10.10.10.1
       DNS Servers: 10.10.10.1
        DNS Domain: ~home
```

If you are using `systemctl` to control the WireGuard interface, this is the type of change (adding or changing `PostUp`) where the `reload` action won't be enough, and you actually need to issue a `restart`.

```{note}
The {manpage}`wg-quick(8)` manual page documents the DNS setting of the WireGuard interface which has the same purpose, but only works if you have `resolveconf` installed. Ubuntu systems by default don't, and rely on `systemd-resolved` instead.
```

## Adding another peer

To add another peer to an existing WireGuard setup, we have to:

1. Generate a new keypair for the new peer
1. Create a new `[Peer]` section on the "other side" of the WireGuard setup
1. Pick a new IP for the new peer

Let's call the new system `ontheroad`, and generate the keys for it:

```bash
$ umask 077
$ wg genkey > ontheroad-private.key
$ wg pubkey < ontheroad-private.key > ontheroad-public.key
$ ls -la ontheroad.*
-rw------- 1 ubuntu ubuntu 45 Aug 22 20:12 ontheroad-private.key
-rw------- 1 ubuntu ubuntu 45 Aug 22 20:13 ontheroad-public.key
```

As for its IP address, let's pick `10.10.11.3/24` for it, which is the next one in the sequence from one of the previous examples in our WireGuard guide:

```
[Interface]
PrivateKey = <contents-of-ontheroad-private.key>
ListenPort = 51000
Address = 10.10.11.3/24

[Peer]
PublicKey = <contents-of-router-public.key>
Endpoint = <home-ppp0-IP-or-hostname>:51000
AllowedIPs = 10.10.11.0/24,10.10.10.0/24
```

The only difference between this config and one for an existing system in this same WireGuard setup will be `PrivateKey` and `Address`.

On the "other side", we add the new `[Peer]` section to the existing config:

```
[Interface]
PrivateKey = <contents-of-router-private.key>
ListenPort = 51000
Address = 10.10.11.1/24

[Peer]
# laptop
PublicKey = <contents-of-laptop-public.key>
AllowedIPs = 10.10.11.2

[Peer]
# ontheroad
PublicKey = <contents-of-ontheroad-public.key>
AllowedIPs = 10.10.11.3
```

To update the interface with the new peer without disrupting existing connections, we use the `reload` action of the systemd unit:

```bash
systemctl reload wg-quick@wg0
```

```{note}
For this case of a "server" or "VPN gateway", where we are just adding another peer to an existing config, the `systemctl reload` action will work well enough to insert the new peer into the WireGuard configuration. However, it won't create new routes, or do any of the other steps that `wg-quick` does. Depending on your setup, you might need a full restart so that `wg-quick` can fully do its job.
```

## Adding a smartphone peer

WireGuard can be installed on many different platforms, and smartphones are included. The [upstream installation page](https://www.wireguard.com/install/) has links for Android and for iOS apps.

Such a mobile client can be configured more easily with the use of QR codes.

We start by creating the new peer's config normally, as if it were any other system (generate keys, pick an IP address, etc). Then, to convert that configuration file to a QR code, install the `qrencode` package:

```bash
sudo apt install qrencode
```

Next, run the following command (assuming a wireguard config, as shown in the other examples, was written to `phone.conf`):

```bash
cat phone.conf | qrencode -t ansiutf8
```

That will generate a QR code in the terminal, ready for scanning with the smartphone app. Note that there is no need for a graphical environment, and this command can be run remotely over SSH for example.

Note that you need to put the private key contents directly into that configuration file, and not use `PostUp` to load it from a separate file.

```{important}
Treat this QR code as a secret, as it contains the private key for the WireGuard interface!
```
