.github/pull_request_template.md, before:

<!-- You can erase any parts of this template not applicable to your Pull Request. -->


### Description
Please provide a clear and concise description of your changes. Explain **what** this pull request accomplishes and *
*why** it is needed.

---

### Related Issue

If this pull request addresses an existing issue, please link to it below. Use the `Fixes #<issue-number>` syntax to
close the issue automatically when the pull request is merged.

Example:

- Fixes: #1234

---

### Contributor License Agreement (CLA)

By contributing to this project, you agree to the terms of
the [Canonical Contributor License Agreement (CLA)](https://ubuntu.com/legal/contributors).  
If you have not already signed the CLA, please do so [here](https://ubuntu.com/legal/contributors).

---

### Commit Message for Squash Merge

If this pull request is merged with the squash option, what should the commit message be?  
Provide the desired commit message below:

Example:
[Category] Brief description of changes made

---

### Checklist

- [ ] I have read and followed the [Ubuntu Server contributing guide](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/server/contributing/).
- [ ] I have signed the [Contributor License Agreement (CLA)](https://ubuntu.com/legal/contributors).
- [ ] My changes are well-documented, and I have updated the documentation as needed.
- [ ] My pull request is linked to an existing issue (if applicable).
- [ ] I have tested my changes, and they work as expected.
- [ ] New and existing unit tests pass locally with my changes.

---

### Additional Notes (Optional)

Add any extra information or context that reviewers may need to know. This could include testing instructions,
screenshots, or links to related discussions.

---

Thank you for contributing to the Ubuntu Server documentation!

Commit message:

Apply suggestions from code review
Resolving suggestions so that we can merge the PR

.github/pull_request_template.md, after:

<!-- You can erase any parts of this template not applicable to your Pull Request. -->


### Description

Please provide a clear and concise description of your changes. Explain **what** this pull request accomplishes and *
*why** it is needed.

---

### Related Issue

If this pull request addresses an existing issue, please link to it below. Use the `Fixes #<issue-number>` syntax to
[close the issue](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/tracking-your-work-with-issues/using-issues/linking-a-pull-request-to-an-issue) automatically when the pull request is merged.

Example:

- Fixes: #1234

---

### Contributor License Agreement (CLA)

By contributing to this project, you agree to the terms of
the [Canonical Contributor License Agreement (CLA)](https://ubuntu.com/legal/contributors).  
If you have not already signed the CLA, [please do so here](https://ubuntu.com/legal/contributors).

---

### Commit Message for Squash Merge

We typically squash commits when merging. You can specify the commit message that should be used in this case if you wish.
Provide the desired commit message below:

[(optional) category] Brief description of changes made, and why

---

### Checklist

- [ ] I have read and followed the [Ubuntu Server contributing guide](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/server/contributing/).
- [ ] I have signed the [Contributor License Agreement (CLA)](https://ubuntu.com/legal/contributors).
- [ ] My pull request is linked to an existing issue (if applicable).
- [ ] I have tested my changes, and they work as expected.

---

### Additional Notes (Optional)

Add any extra information or context that reviewers may need to know. This could include testing instructions,
screenshots, or links to related discussions.

---

Thank you for contributing to the Ubuntu Server documentation!
