index.rst, before:

Ubuntu Server documentation
###########################

.. only:: latex

   .. rubric:: Overview

**Ubuntu Server** is a version of the Ubuntu operating system designed and
engineered as a backbone for the internet.

Ubuntu Server brings economic and technical scalability to your datacentre,
public or private. Whether you want to deploy an OpenStack cloud, a Kubernetes
cluster or a 50,000-node render farm, Ubuntu Server delivers the best value
scale-out performance available.

View our official documentation online at: `<https://ubuntu.com/server/docs>`_

.. only:: html

   In this documentation
   =========================

.. only:: latex

   .. rubric:: In this documentation

.. grid:: 1 1 2 2
   :gutter: 3
   :margin: 0

   .. grid-item-card:: :ref:`Tutorial <tutorial>`

       Get started - a hands-on introduction to Ubuntu Server for new users

   .. grid-item-card:: :ref:`How-to guides <how-to>`

       Step-by-step guides covering key operations and common tasks

   .. grid-item-card:: :ref:`Explanation <explanation>`

       Concepts - discussion and clarification of key topics

   .. grid-item-card:: :ref:`Reference <reference>`

       Technical information - package specifications, APIs, architecture

.. only:: html

   Project and community
   =====================
   
.. only:: latex

   .. rubric:: Project and community
   
Ubuntu Server is a member of the Ubuntu family. It's an open source project
that welcomes community projects, contributions, suggestions, fixes and
constructive feedback.

If you find any errors or have suggestions for improvements to pages, please
use the link at the bottom of each topic titled: "Help improve this document
in the forum". This link will take you to the Server Discourse forum for the
specific page you are viewing. There you can share your comments or let us
know about bugs with any page. 

* Read our `Code of Conduct`_
* `Get support`_
* `Join the Discourse forum`_
* `Download`_
* Find out how to `contribute to the Server Guide`_, or let us know your
  `feedback and suggestions`_.

Thinking about using Ubuntu Server for your next project? `Get in touch!`_

.. only:: html

   PDFs and previous releases
   --------------------------

.. only:: latex

   .. rubric:: PDFs and previous releases

Below are links to the previous Ubuntu Server release server guides as well as
an offline copy of the current version of this site:

* `Current PDF`_ (for Ubuntu 20.04 LTS onwards)
* `Ubuntu 18.04 LTS PDF`_

.. toctree::
   :hidden:
   :maxdepth: 2

   Tutorial <docs/tutorial.rst>

.. toctree::
   :hidden:
   :maxdepth: 2
   
   How-to guides <docs/how-to.rst>
   
.. toctree::
   :hidden:
   :maxdepth: 2

   Explanation <docs/explanation.rst>

.. toctree::
   :hidden:
   :maxdepth: 2

   Reference <docs/reference.rst>

.. LINKS
.. _Code of Conduct: https://ubuntu.com/community/code-of-conduct
.. _Get support: https://ubuntu.com/support/community-support
.. _Join the Discourse forum: https://discourse.ubuntu.com/c/server/17
.. _Download: https://ubuntu.com/server
.. _contribute to the Server Guide: https://discourse.ubuntu.com/t/-/38717
.. _feedback and suggestions: https://discourse.ubuntu.com/t/-/38718
.. _Get in touch!: https://ubuntu.com/server/contact-us?product=server
.. _Current PDF: https://documentation.ubuntu.com/_/downloads/server/en/latest/pdf/
.. _Ubuntu 18.04 LTS PDF: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/8f8ea0cf-18-04-serverguide.pdf

Commit message:

Add "contributing" docs section (#13)
* Add contributing docs

index.rst, after:

Ubuntu Server documentation
###########################

.. only:: latex

   .. rubric:: Overview

**Ubuntu Server** is a version of the Ubuntu operating system designed and
engineered as a backbone for the internet.

Ubuntu Server brings economic and technical scalability to your datacentre,
public or private. Whether you want to deploy an OpenStack cloud, a Kubernetes
cluster or a 50,000-node render farm, Ubuntu Server delivers the best value
scale-out performance available.

View our official documentation online at: `<https://ubuntu.com/server/docs>`_

.. only:: html

   In this documentation
   =========================

.. only:: latex

   .. rubric:: In this documentation

.. grid:: 1 1 2 2
   :gutter: 3
   :margin: 0

   .. grid-item-card:: :ref:`Tutorial <tutorial>`

       Get started - a hands-on introduction to Ubuntu Server for new users

   .. grid-item-card:: :ref:`How-to guides <how-to>`

       Step-by-step guides covering key operations and common tasks

   .. grid-item-card:: :ref:`Explanation <explanation>`

       Concepts - discussion and clarification of key topics

   .. grid-item-card:: :ref:`Reference <reference>`

       Technical information - package specifications, APIs, architecture

.. only:: html

   Project and community
   =====================
   
.. only:: latex

   .. rubric:: Project and community
   
Ubuntu Server is a member of the Ubuntu family. It's an open source project
that welcomes community projects, contributions, suggestions, fixes and
constructive feedback.

If you find any errors or have suggestions for improvements to pages, please
use the link at the bottom of each topic titled: "Help improve this document
in the forum". This link will take you to the Server Discourse forum for the
specific page you are viewing. There you can share your comments or let us
know about bugs with any page. 

* Read our `Code of Conduct`_
* `Get support`_
* `Join the Discourse forum`_
* `Download`_
* Find out how to :ref:`contribute to the Server Guide <contribute>`, or let
  us know your `feedback and suggestions`_.

Thinking about using Ubuntu Server for your next project? `Get in touch!`_

.. only:: html

   PDFs and previous releases
   --------------------------

.. only:: latex

   .. rubric:: PDFs and previous releases

Below are links to the previous Ubuntu Server release server guides as well as
an offline copy of the current version of this site:

* `Current PDF`_ (for Ubuntu 20.04 LTS onwards)
* `Ubuntu 18.04 LTS PDF`_

.. toctree::
   :hidden:
   :maxdepth: 2

   Tutorial <docs/tutorial.rst>

.. toctree::
   :hidden:
   :maxdepth: 2
   
   How-to guides <docs/how-to.rst>
   
.. toctree::
   :hidden:
   :maxdepth: 2

   Explanation <docs/explanation.rst>

.. toctree::
   :hidden:
   :maxdepth: 2

   Reference <docs/reference.rst>

.. toctree::
   :hidden:
   :maxdepth: 2
   
   Contributing <contributing/index.rst>

.. LINKS
.. _Code of Conduct: https://ubuntu.com/community/code-of-conduct
.. _Get support: https://ubuntu.com/support/community-support
.. _Join the Discourse forum: https://discourse.ubuntu.com/c/server/17
.. _Download: https://ubuntu.com/server
.. _feedback and suggestions: https://discourse.ubuntu.com/t/-/38718
.. _Get in touch!: https://ubuntu.com/server/contact-us?product=server
.. _Current PDF: https://documentation.ubuntu.com/_/downloads/server/en/latest/pdf/
.. _Ubuntu 18.04 LTS PDF: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/8f8ea0cf-18-04-serverguide.pdf
