docs/how-to/virtualisation/enable-nested-virtualisation.md, before:

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    description: Enable nested virtualisation on Ubuntu x86 systems using kvm_intel or kvm_amd kernel modules to run VMs inside VMs.
---

(enable-nested-virtualisation)=
# How to enable nested virtualisation

```{important}
Nested virtualisation is enabled by default on Ubuntu. If you are using Ubuntu, it's unlikely that you will need to manually enable the feature. If you check (using the steps below) and discover that nested virtualisation is enabled, then you will not need to do anything further.
```

There may be use cases where you need to enable nested virtualisation so that you can deploy instances inside other instances. The sections below explain how to check if nested virtualisation is enabled/available and how to enable it if that is not the case. Bear in mind that currently nested virtualisation is only supported in Ubuntu on `x86` machine architecture. 

## Check if nested virtualisation is enabled

Check if the required kernel module for your CPU is already loaded. Hosts with Intel CPUs require the `kvm_intel` module while {term}`AMD` hosts require `kvm_amd` instead:
  
```bash
$ lsmod | grep -i kvm
kvm_intel               204800  0
kvm                  1347584  1 kvm_intel
```

### If the module is loaded

If the module is already loaded, you can check if nested virtualisation is enabled by running the following command:

```bash
cat /sys/module/<module>/parameters/nested
```

As an example for AMD hosts:

```bash
$ cat /sys/module/kvm_amd/parameters/nested
1
```

If the output is either `1` or `Y` then nested virtualisation is enabled and you will not need to manually enable the feature (this should be the case for Ubuntu users).

### If the module is not loaded

If the module your host requires is not loaded, you can load it using `modprobe` in combination with the property `nested=1` to enable nested virtualisation, as shown below for Intel hosts:

```bash
modprobe kvm-intel nested=1
```

Or as follows for AMD hosts: 

```bash
modprobe kvm-amd nested=1
```

## Enable nested virtualisation 

If the above checks indicate that nested virtualisation is not enabled, you can follow the below steps to enable it.

* Create a file in `/etc/modprobe.d` -e.g., `/etc/modprobe.d/kvm.conf`- and add the line `options kvm-intel nested=1` to that file (replace `kvm-intel` with `kvm-amd` for AMD hosts).

* Reload the kernel module to apply the changes:

```bash
  sudo modprobe -r <module>
```

Example for Intel hosts:

```bash
  sudo modprobe -r kvm-intel
```

* You should now be able to see nested virtualisation enabled:

Example for Intel hosts:
```bash
  $ cat /sys/module/kvm_intel/parameters/nested
  Y
```

## Check and enable nested virtualisation inside an instance

Once the host is ready to use nested virtualisation, it is time to check if the guest instance can run additional nested VMs inside it.

To determine if an instance can host another instance on top, run the below command within the instance:

```bash
egrep "svm|vmx" /proc/cpuinfo
``` 

If any of these are present in the output (depending on whether the host is AMD or Intel respectively), then virtualisation is available in that instance. If this is not the case you will need to edit the instance CPU settings:

* Shut down the instance
* Edit the instance XML definition file executing: `virsh edit <instance>`
* Search the `cpu mode` parameter in and set its value to either `host-model` or `host-passthrough` (details about these modes can be found [here](https://wiki.openstack.org/wiki/LibvirtXMLCPUModel)).

  Sample `cpu mode` parameter in XML with nested virtualisation:

  ```xml
    <cpu mode='host-model' check='partial'/>
  ```
  
* Save the modifications and start the instance

## Limitations of nested virtualisation

Nested virtualisation has some key limitations you'd need to consider, namely that not all KVM features will be available for instances running nested VMs, and actions such as migrating or saving the parent instance will not be possible until the nested instance is stopped.

Commit message:

nested-virtualisation : fix instructions error and grammar check

docs/how-to/virtualisation/enable-nested-virtualisation.md, after:

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    description: Enable nested virtualisation on Ubuntu x86 systems using kvm_intel or kvm_amd kernel modules to run VMs inside VMs.
---

(what-is-nested-virtualisation)=
# What is nested virtualisation

The nested virtualization capability allows a guest virtual machine (also referred to as `level 1` or `L1`) that runs on a physical host (`level 0` or `L0`) acting as a hypervisor to create its own guest virtual machines (`L2`).

(enable-nested-virtualisation)=
# How to enable nested virtualisation

```{important}
Nested virtualisation is enabled by default on Ubuntu. If you are using Ubuntu, it's unlikely that you will need to manually enable the feature. If you check (using the steps below) and discover that nested virtualisation is enabled, then you will not need to do anything further.
```

There may be use cases where you need to enable nested virtualisation so that you can deploy VMs inside other VMs. The sections below explain how to check if nested virtualisation is enabled/available and how to enable it if that is not the case. Bear in mind that currently nested virtualisation is only supported in Ubuntu on `x86` machine architecture.

## Check if nested virtualisation is enabled

Check if the required kernel module for your CPU is already loaded. Hosts with Intel CPUs require the `kvm_intel` module, while {term}`AMD` hosts require `kvm_amd` instead:
  
```bash
$ lsmod | grep -i kvm
kvm_intel               204800  0
kvm                  1347584  1 kvm_intel
```

### If the module is loaded

If the module is already loaded, you can check if nested virtualisation is enabled by running the following command:

```bash
cat /sys/module/<module>/parameters/nested
```

As an example for AMD hosts:

```bash
$ cat /sys/module/kvm_amd/parameters/nested
1
```

If the output is either `1` or `Y`, then nested virtualisation is enabled and you will not need to manually enable the feature (this should be the case for Ubuntu users).

### If the module is not loaded

If the module your host requires is not loaded, you can load it using `modprobe` in combination with the property `nested=1` to enable nested virtualisation, as shown below for Intel hosts:

```bash
modprobe kvm-intel nested=1
```

Or as follows for AMD hosts: 

```bash
modprobe kvm-amd nested=1
```

## Enable nested virtualisation 

If the above checks indicate that nested virtualisation is not enabled, you can follow the below steps to enable it permanently on the system.

* Create a file in `/etc/modprobe.d` (e.g., `/etc/modprobe.d/kvm.conf`) and add the line `options kvm-intel nested=1` to that file (replace `kvm-intel` with `kvm-amd` for AMD hosts).

* Reload the kernel module to apply the changes:

```bash
  sudo modprobe -r <module>
  sudo modprobe <module>
```

```{note}
Make sure to stop all running VMs that might use the kernel module and prevent its reload.
```

Example for Intel hosts:

```bash
  sudo modprobe -r kvm-intel
  sudo modprobe kvm-intel
```

* You should now be able to see nested virtualisation enabled:

Example for Intel hosts:
```bash
  $ cat /sys/module/kvm_intel/parameters/nested
  Y
```

## Check and enable nested virtualisation inside a VM

Once the nested virtualization is enabled on the host, we can run a `L1` VM
and a `L2` VM inside it. The following instructions assume that you are using libvirt to
manage the VMs but other tools like `multipass` should also work out of the box.

Log into the `L1` VM and check if this can host another `L1` VM on top by running the below command:

```bash
egrep "svm|vmx" /proc/cpuinfo
``` 

If any of these are present in the output (depending on whether the host is AMD or Intel respectively), then virtualisation is available in that instance. If this is not the case, you will need to edit the instance CPU settings:

* Shut down the instance
* Edit the instance XML definition file by executing: `virsh edit <instance>`
* Search for the `cpu mode` parameter and set its value to either `host-model` or `host-passthrough` (details about these modes can be found [here](https://wiki.openstack.org/wiki/LibvirtXMLCPUModel)).

  Sample `cpu mode` parameter in XML with nested virtualisation:

  ```xml
    <cpu mode='host-model' check='partial'/>
  ```
  
* Save the modifications and start the instance

## Limitations of nested virtualisation

Nested virtualisation has some key limitations you'd need to consider, namely that not all KVM features will be available for instances running nested VMs, and actions such as migrating or saving the parent instance will not be possible until the nested instance is stopped.
