how-to/index.rst, before:

.. _how-to:

Ubuntu Server how-to guides
***************************

If you have a specific goal, but are already familiar with Ubuntu Server, our
how-to guides have more in-depth detail than our tutorials and can be applied
to a broader set of applications. They’ll help you achieve an end result but
may require you to understand and adapt the steps to fit your specific
requirements.

Server installation
===================

.. toctree::
    :hidden:
    :titlesonly:

    installation.rst

Our list of :ref:`installation guides <how-to-server-installation>` contains
installation instructions for a variety of architecture-specific and advanced
setups. For a general installation, or if you're just getting started with
Ubuntu, you may prefer to use our :ref:`basic installation <basic-installation>`
tutorial.

Security
========

.. toctree::
    :hidden:
    :titlesonly:

    security.rst

:ref:`System security <how-to-security>` is a crucial topic for any Ubuntu user.
In addition to general security topics such as setting up a firewall, AppArmor
profiles and user/group management, you will also find how-to guides on:

* **Authentication** with Kerberos, network user authentication with SSSD and
  physical authentication with smart cards
* **Cryptography** with OpenSSH
* **Virtual Private Networks** OpenVPN and WireGuard VPN

Networking
==========

.. toctree::
    :hidden:
    :titlesonly:

    networking.rst

:ref:`Our networking section <how-to-networking>` is where you will find how-to
guides on a broad range of networking topics, such as:

* **Network tooling and configuration** including time synchronisation, DHCP
  for IP address assignment, Domain Name Service (DNS) (and more!)
* **Network shares** for sharing resources (files, services, directories)
  across networks, including integration with Windows

Managing software
=================

.. include:: software.rst
    :start-line: 4
    :end-before: .. toctree::

Data and storage
================

OpenLDAP
--------

.. include:: openldap.rst
    :start-line: 4
    :end-before: .. toctree::

Databases
---------

.. include:: databases.rst
    :start-line: 4
    :end-before: .. toctree::

Storage
-------

.. include:: storage.rst
    :start-line: 4
    :end-before: .. toctree::

Backups and version control
---------------------------

.. include:: backups.rst
    :start-line: 4
    :end-before: .. toctree::

Mail services
=============

.. include:: mail-services.rst
    :start-line: 4
    :end-before: .. toctree::

Web services
============

.. include:: web-services.rst
    :start-line: 4
    :end-before: .. toctree::

Graphics
========

.. include:: graphics.rst
    :start-line: 4
    :end-before: .. toctree::

Virtualisation
==============

.. include:: virtualisation.rst
    :start-line: 4
    :end-before: .. toctree::

Containers
==========

.. include:: containers.rst
    :start-line: 4
    :end-before: .. toctree::

High Availability
=================

.. include:: high-availability.rst
    :start-line: 4
    :end-before: .. toctree::

Observability
=============

.. include:: observability.rst
    :start-line: 4
    :end-before: .. toctree::


    




.. toctree::
    :hidden:
    :titlesonly:

    software.rst
    openldap.rst
    databases.rst
    mail-services.rst
    backups.rst
    web-services.rst
    storage.rst
    graphics.rst
    observability.rst
    virtualisation.rst
    containers.rst
    high-availability.rst

Commit message:

Update landing pages, storage section (#227)
* Add new landing page for combined data and storage
* Update other landing pages
* Format toctrees consistently
* Fix broken link

how-to/index.rst, after:

.. _how-to:

Ubuntu Server how-to guides
***************************

If you have a specific goal, but are already familiar with Ubuntu Server, our
how-to guides have more in-depth detail than our tutorials and can be applied
to a broader set of applications. They’ll help you achieve an end result but
may require you to understand and adapt the steps to fit your specific
requirements.

Server installation
===================

.. toctree::
    :hidden:
    :titlesonly:

    installation.rst

Our list of :ref:`installation guides <how-to-server-installation>` contains
installation instructions for a variety of architecture-specific and advanced
setups. For a general installation, or if you're just getting started with
Ubuntu, you may prefer to use our :ref:`basic installation <basic-installation>`
tutorial.

Security
========

.. toctree::
    :hidden:
    :titlesonly:

    security.rst

:ref:`System security <how-to-security>` is a crucial topic for any Ubuntu user.
In addition to general security topics such as setting up a firewall, AppArmor
profiles and user/group management, you will also find how-to guides on:

* **Authentication** with Kerberos, network user authentication with SSSD and
  physical authentication with smart cards
* **Cryptography** with OpenSSH
* **Virtual Private Networks** OpenVPN and WireGuard VPN

Networking
==========

.. toctree::
    :hidden:
    :titlesonly:

    networking.rst

:ref:`Our networking section <how-to-networking>` is where you will find how-to
guides on a broad range of networking topics, such as:

* **Network tooling and configuration** including time synchronisation, DHCP
  for IP address assignment, Domain Name Service (DNS) (and more!)
* **Network shares** for sharing resources (files, services, directories)
  across networks, including integration with Windows

Managing software
=================

.. include:: software.rst
    :start-line: 4
    :end-before: .. toctree::

Data and storage
================

.. toctree::
    :hidden:
    :titlesonly:

    data-and-storage.rst

:ref:`The data and storage section <how-to-data-and-storage>` covers the
following:

* **Managing data** in the OpenLDAP and databases topics
* **Storage and backups**, including partitioning (with LVM), backup utilities,
  and version control

Mail services
=============

.. include:: mail-services.rst
    :start-line: 4
    :end-before: .. toctree::

Web services
============

.. include:: web-services.rst
    :start-line: 4
    :end-before: .. toctree::

Graphics
========

.. include:: graphics.rst
    :start-line: 4
    :end-before: .. toctree::

Virtualisation
==============

.. include:: virtualisation.rst
    :start-line: 4
    :end-before: .. toctree::

Containers
==========

.. include:: containers.rst
    :start-line: 4
    :end-before: .. toctree::

High Availability
=================

.. include:: high-availability.rst
    :start-line: 4
    :end-before: .. toctree::

Observability
=============

.. include:: observability.rst
    :start-line: 4
    :end-before: .. toctree::


    




.. toctree::
    :hidden:
    :titlesonly:

    software.rst
    mail-services.rst
    web-services.rst
    graphics.rst
    observability.rst
    virtualisation.rst
    containers.rst
    high-availability.rst
