docs/how-to/how-to-configure-kerberos-service-principals.md, before:

(how-to-configure-kerberos-service-principals)=
# Configure service principals


The specific steps to enable Kerberos for a service can vary, but in general both of the following are needed:

- A principal for the service -- usually `service/host@REALM`
- A keytab accessible to the service wherever it's running -- usually in `/etc/krb5.keytab`

For example, let's create a principal for an LDAP service running on the `ldap-server.example.com` host:

```bash
ubuntu@ldap-server:~$ sudo kadmin -p ubuntu/admin
Authenticating as principal ubuntu/admin with password.
Password for ubuntu/admin@EXAMPLE.COM:
kadmin:  addprinc -randkey ldap/ldap-server.example.com
No policy specified for ldap/ldap-server.example.com@EXAMPLE.COM; defaulting to no policy
Principal "ldap/ldap-server.example.com@EXAMPLE.COM" created.
```

Let's dig a bit into what is happening here:
- The `kadmin` command is being run on the `ldap-server` machine, not on the Key Distribution Center (KDC). We are using `kadmin` remotely.
- It's being run with `sudo`. The reason for this will become clear later.
- We are logged in on the server as `ubuntu`, but specifying an `ubuntu/admin` principal. Remember the `ubuntu` principal has no special privileges.
- The name of the principal we are creating follows the pattern `service/hostname`.
- In order to select a random secret, we pass the `-randkey` parameter. Otherwise we would be asked to type in a password.

With the principal created, we need to extract the key from the KDC and store it in the `ldap-server` host, so that the `ldap` service can use it to authenticate itself with the KDC. Still in the same `kadmin` session:

```text
kadmin:  ktadd ldap/ldap-server.example.com
Entry for principal ldap/ldap-server.example.com with kvno 2, encryption type aes256-cts-hmac-sha1-96 added to keytab FILE:/etc/krb5.keytab.
Entry for principal ldap/ldap-server.example.com with kvno 2, encryption type aes128-cts-hmac-sha1-96 added to keytab FILE:/etc/krb5.keytab.
```

This is why we needed to run `kadmin` with `sudo`: so that it can write to `/etc/krb5.keytab`. This is the system keytab file, which is the default file for all keys that might be needed for services on this host, and we can list them with `klist`. Back in the shell:

```bash
$ sudo klist -k
Keytab name: FILE:/etc/krb5.keytab
KVNO Principal

Commit message:

Final fetch (#21)
* Final fetch from Discourse docs

* delete redundant files

docs/how-to/how-to-configure-kerberos-service-principals.md, after:

(how-to-configure-kerberos-service-principals)=
# How to configure Kerberos service principals


The specific steps to enable Kerberos for a service can vary, but in general both of the following are needed:

- A principal for the service -- usually `service/host@REALM`
- A keytab accessible to the service wherever it's running -- usually in `/etc/krb5.keytab`

For example, let's create a principal for an LDAP service running on the `ldap-server.example.com` host:

```bash
ubuntu@ldap-server:~$ sudo kadmin -p ubuntu/admin
Authenticating as principal ubuntu/admin with password.
Password for ubuntu/admin@EXAMPLE.COM:
kadmin:  addprinc -randkey ldap/ldap-server.example.com
No policy specified for ldap/ldap-server.example.com@EXAMPLE.COM; defaulting to no policy
Principal "ldap/ldap-server.example.com@EXAMPLE.COM" created.
```

Let's dig a bit into what is happening here:
- The `kadmin` command is being run on the `ldap-server` machine, not on the Key Distribution Center (KDC). We are using `kadmin` remotely.
- It's being run with `sudo`. The reason for this will become clear later.
- We are logged in on the server as `ubuntu`, but specifying an `ubuntu/admin` principal. Remember the `ubuntu` principal has no special privileges.
- The name of the principal we are creating follows the pattern `service/hostname`.
- In order to select a random secret, we pass the `-randkey` parameter. Otherwise we would be asked to type in a password.

With the principal created, we need to extract the key from the KDC and store it in the `ldap-server` host, so that the `ldap` service can use it to authenticate itself with the KDC. Still in the same `kadmin` session:

```text
kadmin:  ktadd ldap/ldap-server.example.com
Entry for principal ldap/ldap-server.example.com with kvno 2, encryption type aes256-cts-hmac-sha1-96 added to keytab FILE:/etc/krb5.keytab.
Entry for principal ldap/ldap-server.example.com with kvno 2, encryption type aes128-cts-hmac-sha1-96 added to keytab FILE:/etc/krb5.keytab.
```

This is why we needed to run `kadmin` with `sudo`: so that it can write to `/etc/krb5.keytab`. This is the system keytab file, which is the default file for all keys that might be needed for services on this host, and we can list them with `klist`. Back in the shell:

```bash
$ sudo klist -k
Keytab name: FILE:/etc/krb5.keytab
KVNO Principal
---- --------------------------------------------------------------------------
   2 ldap/ldap-server.example.com@EXAMPLE.COM
   2 ldap/ldap-server.example.com@EXAMPLE.COM
```

If you don't have the `kadmin` utility on the target host, one alternative is to extract the keys on a different host and into a different file, and then transfer this file *securely* to the target server. For example:

```text
kadmin:  ktadd -k /home/ubuntu/ldap.keytab ldap/ldap-server.example.com
Entry for principal ldap/ldap-server.example.com with kvno 3, encryption type aes256-cts-hmac-sha1-96 added to keytab WRFILE:/home/ubuntu/ldap.keytab.
Entry for principal ldap/ldap-server.example.com with kvno 3, encryption type aes128-cts-hmac-sha1-96 added to keytab WRFILE:/home/ubuntu/ldap.keytab.
````

> **Note**:
> Notice how the `kvno` changed from `2` to `3` in the example above, when using `ktadd` a second time? This is the key version, and it invalidated the previously extracted key with `kvno 2`. Every time a key is extracted with `ktadd`, its version is bumped and that invalidates the previous ones!

In this case, as long as the target location is writable, you don't even have to run `kadmin` with `sudo`.

Then use `scp` to transfer it to the target host:

```bash
$ scp /home/ubuntu/ldap.keytab ldap-server.example.com:
```

And over there copy it to `/etc/krb5.keytab`, making sure it's mode `0600` and owned by `root:root`.
