(about-debuginfod)=
# About debuginfod

[`debuginfod`](https://sourceware.org/elfutils/Debuginfod.html) is a service for software developers. It helps with diagnosing issues in software and centralises the storage of debug symbols, source code, etc.

One of the main advantages to `debuginfod` is that debugging information can be retrieved on-demand for packages shipped with Ubuntu without the need to [manually install](debug-symbol-packages.md) the debug symbol packages.

Ubuntu maintains its own `debuginfod` service, which regularly indexes the debug symbols present in `ddebs` and other packages and serves this information over HTTPS.

Currently, the service only provides DWARF information. There are plans for it to also index and serve source-code in the future.

## Using the service

`debuginfod` is indexing `ddebs` packages from all [supported Ubuntu releases](https://releases.ubuntu.com/).  Once a release goes unsupported, we stop indexing `ddebs` from it and eventually stop serving debug symbols for its packages.

From Kinetic onwards, when you install [GNU Debugger (GDB)](https://www.sourceware.org/gdb/) your system will be automatically configured to use Ubuntu's `debuginfod` service.  For previous Ubuntu releases, you can manually enable the service by setting the `DEBUGINFOD_URLS` environment variable in your shell. If you use Bash, you can do that by adding the following snippet to your `~/.bashrc`:

```text
export DEBUGINFOD_URLS="https://debuginfod.ubuntu.com"
```

When you run {term}`GDB`, and if you have the `DEBUGINFOD_URLS` variable in your environment, you will be asked whether you would like to use the service.  If you want to make sure that GDB always uses `debuginfod`, you can put the following snippet inside your `~/.gdbinit` file:

```text
set debuginfod enabled on
```

The debug symbol files will be downloaded on-the-fly during your debugging session, and will be saved locally inside the `$XDG_CACHE_HOME/.debuginfod_client/` directory. If `$XDG_CACHE_HOME` is empty, then `~/.cache/debuginfod_client` is used instead.

You can safely remove this directory or any files inside it; they will only be downloaded again if and when they are needed.

## Example session with GDB

If you have enabled use of `debuginfod` on your system, here is what happens when you invoke GDB to debug a binary from an Ubuntu package:

```bash
$ gdb -q program
Reading symbols from program...

This GDB supports auto-downloading debuginfo from the following URLs:
https://debuginfod.ubuntu.com 
Enable debuginfod for this session? (y or [n]) 
```

When you answer `y` to the question above, GDB will download the debug symbols for `program`:

```
Enable debuginfod for this session? (y or [n]) y
Debuginfod has been enabled.
To make this setting permanent, add 'set debuginfod enabled on' to .gdbinit.
Downloading 0.20 MB separate debug info for /home/ubuntu/program
Reading symbols from /home/ubuntu/.cache/debuginfod_client/c0fbda15a807f880e9d0b2dcc635eeeb1f0f728e/debuginfo...                                                                           
(gdb) 
```

## Opting out of the service

If, for some reason, you prefer not to use the service, you can opt-out of it by unsetting the `DEBUGINFOD_URLS` environment variable. This can be done by putting the following snippet inside your shell's configuration file:

```
unset DEBUGINFOD_URLS
```

You can also disable GDB's willingness to use `debuginfod` by putting the following snippet inside your `~/.gdbinit`:

```
set debuginfod enabled off
```

## How does `debuginfod` find the debug symbols for the binary I am debugging?

`debuginfod` relies on a unique hash that identifies binaries and shared libraries called **Build-ID**.  This 160-bit SHA-1 hash is generated by the compiler, and can be consulted using tools like `readelf`:

```
$ readelf -n /usr/bin/bash

Displaying notes found in: .note.gnu.property
  Owner                Data size        Description
  GNU                  0x00000020       NT_GNU_PROPERTY_TYPE_0
      Properties: x86 feature: IBT, SHSTK
        x86 ISA needed: x86-64-baseline

Displaying notes found in: .note.gnu.build-id
  Owner                Data size        Description
  GNU                  0x00000014       NT_GNU_BUILD_ID (unique build ID bitstring)
    Build ID: 3e770d2cd0302c6ff2a184e8d2bf4ec98cfcded4

Displaying notes found in: .note.ABI-tag
  Owner                Data size        Description
  GNU                  0x00000010       NT_GNU_ABI_TAG (ABI version tag)
    OS: Linux, ABI: 3.2.0
```

When you are debugging a program, GDB will send the program's Build-ID to the `debuginfod` server, which will check if it has the corresponding debug information for that binary/library.  If it does, then it will send the debug symbols via HTTPS back to GDB.

## Can `ddebs` packages co-exist with `debuginfod`?

Yes. GDB will try to use local debug information if available.  That means that if you have a `ddeb` package installed that provides the necessary debug symbols for the program being debugged (or if you have already downloaded that information from the `debuginfod` service earlier), then GDB will use it in favour of performing the download.

## Can I use `debuginfod` with my own binary that links against system libraries?

Yes! `debuginfod` will not be able to provide any debug symbols for your own program, but it will happily serve debug information for any system libraries that your program links against.
