docs/reference/other-tools/sudo-rs.md, before:

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    description: "Reference documentation for sudo-rs, a memory-safe Rust implementation of the sudo command on Ubuntu Server."
---

(sudo-rs)=
# sudo-rs

This page serves as a reference for the key differences between `sudo.ws` and `sudo-rs`.

Note: Both projects are under active development, so it is not possible to maintain a fully up-to-date list of differences. This is a list of major differences as of the Ubuntu 25.10 release.

For the most accurate and current information, refer to
`sudo-rs --help` for a list of supported options in your installed version.
Refer to `man sudoers-rs` for the `/etc/sudoers` configuration options supported by `sudo-rs`.

## Differences

1. Start with the official documentation from the `sudo-rs` project.

   * [differences-from-original-sudo](https://github.com/trifectatechfoundation/sudo-rs#differences-from-original-sudo)
   * [aim-of-the-project](https://github.com/trifectatechfoundation/sudo-rs?tab=readme-ov-file#aim-of-the-project)

2. `sudo-rs` prompt. 

  This is the most common error users encounter when using Expect-based automation. The error often is a TIMEOUT because Expect is pattern matching on the `sudo.ws` prompt.

  `sudo.ws` prompt for password says `[sudo] password for <USERNAME>`, whereas `sudo-rs` prompt says `[sudo: authenticate] <METHOD>:`. `sudo-rs` transparently prints whatever PAM says such as `Password:`, `PIN:`, etc.

  You can use `--prompt ""` in Expect-based scripts to skip the regex-based matching of the prompt.

  [See more information](https://github.com/trifectatechfoundation/sudo-rs/issues/1242)

3. I/O logging and `sudoreplay` is not supported. The programs are `sudo_logsrvd`, `sudo_sendlog`, and `sudoreplay`.

4. There is no `sudoers.ldap`. You need to use [LDAP authentication via PAM](https://github.com/trifectatechfoundation/sudo-rs/issues/445).

5. The `sudo-rs` team maintains the list of [CLI flags parity](https://github.com/trifectatechfoundation/sudo-rs/issues/129) with `sudo.ws`

Commit message:

sudo-rs: improve metadata to mention differences
Signed-off-by: Christian Ehrhardt <christian.ehrhardt@canonical.com>

docs/reference/other-tools/sudo-rs.md, after:

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    description: "Reference documentation for sudo-rs outlining differences to the former sudo.ws, to guide upgraders of Ubuntu Server how they might need to adapt to the new implementation."
---

(sudo-rs)=
# sudo-rs

This page serves as a reference for the key differences between `sudo.ws` and `sudo-rs`.

Note: Both projects are under active development, so it is not possible to maintain a fully up-to-date list of differences. This is a list of major differences as of the Ubuntu 25.10 release.

For the most accurate and current information, refer to
`sudo-rs --help` for a list of supported options in your installed version.
Refer to `man sudoers-rs` for the `/etc/sudoers` configuration options supported by `sudo-rs`.

## Differences

1. Start with the official documentation from the `sudo-rs` project.

   * [differences-from-original-sudo](https://github.com/trifectatechfoundation/sudo-rs#differences-from-original-sudo)
   * [aim-of-the-project](https://github.com/trifectatechfoundation/sudo-rs?tab=readme-ov-file#aim-of-the-project)

2. `sudo-rs` prompt. 

  This is the most common error users encounter when using Expect-based automation. The error often is a TIMEOUT because Expect is pattern matching on the `sudo.ws` prompt.

  `sudo.ws` prompt for password says `[sudo] password for <USERNAME>`, whereas `sudo-rs` prompt says `[sudo: authenticate] <METHOD>:`. `sudo-rs` transparently prints whatever PAM says such as `Password:`, `PIN:`, etc.

  You can use `--prompt ""` in Expect-based scripts to skip the regex-based matching of the prompt.

  [See more information](https://github.com/trifectatechfoundation/sudo-rs/issues/1242)

3. I/O logging and `sudoreplay` is not supported. The programs are `sudo_logsrvd`, `sudo_sendlog`, and `sudoreplay`.

4. There is no `sudoers.ldap`. You need to use [LDAP authentication via PAM](https://github.com/trifectatechfoundation/sudo-rs/issues/445).

5. The `sudo-rs` team maintains the list of [CLI flags parity](https://github.com/trifectatechfoundation/sudo-rs/issues/129) with `sudo.ws`
