docs/contributing/get-help.md, before:

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    description: "Find support and guidance for contributing to Ubuntu Server documentation, including community resources and help channels."
---

(get-help)=
# Getting help

You might occasionally run into problems -- this is normal and expected! We
will do our best to help.

## Directly on GitHub issues

Each issue should contain a description of the task to be completed, and some
suggestions for how you might want to tackle it if there are several options.
You can always leave a question on an issue to ask for more information if
there is something missing or some clarification if the issue is confusingly
presented.

If you have not been able to work on the issue for a while, please leave a
comment on it. This helps us know if you intend to complete the task, and to
reassign the task to someone else if you know you will not be able
to finish it.

If you want help from another contributor, that's also fine! Leave a comment
describing the problem you're facing and what help you need to resolve it.

## Help with your submission

Your pull request will be assigned a reviewer from among the repository
maintainers. You can contact them by leaving a comment on your own PR -- you
can also "ping" them in that comment to send them a notification by using
`@<their username>`.

## Community forums

For more general questions about Ubuntu Server, you're welcome to
[create a post](https://discourse.ubuntu.com/c/project/server/17) on the Ubuntu Server forum.

You can also use the [Canonical Open Documentation Academy (CODA) forum](https://discourse.ubuntu.com/c/community/open-documentation-academy/166),
which is the hub for questions about documentation specifically. It includes
our Getting started guide and links to our weekly Documentation office hours,
alongside meeting notes, updates, external links and discussions.

## Synchronous chat

For more interactive chat, the documentation team {matrix}`can be found on Matrix <documentation>`.

## Calendar

Subscribe to the [Documentation event calendar](https://calendar.google.com/calendar/u/0?cid=Y19mYTY4YzE5YWEwY2Y4YWE1ZWNkNzMyNjZmNmM0ZDllOTRhNTIwNTNjODc1ZjM2ZmQ3Y2MwNTQ0MzliOTIzZjMzQGdyb3VwLmNhbGVuZGFyLmdvb2dsZS5jb20). Not only does this include
the Documentation office hours, it will also include any other discussion or
training events we organize.

Commit message:

Update contributing docs (#644)
* Update copilot instructions

* Overhaul contributing guide

* Fix spelling errors

docs/contributing/get-help.md, after:

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    description: "Find support and guidance for contributing to Ubuntu Server documentation, including community resources and help channels."
---

(get-help)=
# Getting help

You might occasionally run into problems -- this is normal and expected! We
will do our best to help.

## Directly on GitHub issues

Each issue should contain a description of the task to be completed, and some
suggestions for how you might want to tackle it if there are several options.
You can always leave a question on an issue to ask for more information if you
need more details or for something to be clarified.

If you have not been able to work on the issue for a while, please leave a
comment on it. This helps us know if you intend to complete the task, and to
reassign the task to someone else if you know you will not be able
to finish it.

If you want help from another contributor, that's also fine! Leave a comment
describing the problem you're facing and what help you need to resolve it.

## Help with your submission

Your pull request will be assigned a reviewer from among the repository
maintainers. You can contact them by leaving a comment on your own PR -- you
can also "ping" them in that comment to send them a notification by using
`@<their username>`.

## Community forums

For more general questions about Ubuntu Server, you're welcome to
[create a post](https://discourse.ubuntu.com/c/project/server/17) on the Ubuntu
Server forum.

The Canonical Open Documentation Academy (CODA)
[also has a forum](https://discourse.ubuntu.com/c/community/open-documentation-academy/166),
which is the hub for questions specifically about documentation.

## Chat to us

For more interactive chat, you can use Matrix:
* {matrix}`To chat to the Server team <server>`
* {matrix}`To talk to technical authors about documentation <documentation>`
