docs/explanation/networking/configuring-networks.md, before:

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    description: "Learn about network configuration options on Ubuntu Server, including Netplan, interfaces, and network management approaches."
---

(configuring-networks)=
# Configuring networks

Network configuration on Ubuntu is handled through [Netplan](https://netplan.io/), which provides a high-level, distribution-agnostic way to define how the network on your system should be set up via a [YAML configuration file](https://netplan.readthedocs.io/en/stable/netplan-yaml/).

While Netplan is a configuration abstraction renderer that covers all aspects of network configuration, here we will outline the underlying system elements like IP addresses, Ethernet devices, name resolution and so on. We will refer to the related Netplan settings where appropriate, but we do recommend studying [the Netplan documentation](https://netplan.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) in general.

## Ethernet interfaces

Ethernet interfaces are identified by the system using predictable network interface names. These names can appear as `eno1` or `enp0s25`. However, in some cases an interface may still use the kernel *eth\#* style of naming.

### Identify Ethernet interfaces

To quickly identify all available Ethernet interfaces, you can use the `ip` command as shown below.

```
ip a
1: lo: <LOOPBACK,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 65536 qdisc noqueue state UNKNOWN group default qlen 1000
    link/loopback 00:00:00:00:00:00 brd 00:00:00:00:00:00
    inet 127.0.0.1/8 scope host lo
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
    inet6 ::1/128 scope host
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
2: enp0s25: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1500 qdisc noqueue state UP group default qlen 1000
    link/ether 00:16:3e:e2:52:42 brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff link-netnsid 0
    inet 10.102.66.200/24 brd 10.102.66.255 scope global dynamic eth0
       valid_lft 3257sec preferred_lft 3257sec
    inet6 fe80::216:3eff:fee2:5242/64 scope link
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
```

Another application that can help identify all network interfaces available to your system is the `lshw` command. This command provides greater details around the hardware capabilities of specific adapters. In the example below, `lshw` shows a single Ethernet interface with the logical name of *eth4* along with bus information, driver details and all supported capabilities.

```
sudo lshw -class network
  *-network
       description: Ethernet interface
       product: MT26448 [ConnectX EN 10GigE, PCIe 2.0 5GT/s]
       vendor: Mellanox Technologies
       physical id: 0
       bus info: pci@0004:01:00.0
       logical name: eth4
       version: b0
       serial: e4:1d:2d:67:83:56
       slot: U78CB.001.WZS09KB-P1-C6-T1
       size: 10Gbit/s
       capacity: 10Gbit/s
       width: 64 bits
       clock: 33MHz
       capabilities: pm vpd msix pciexpress bus_master cap_list ethernet physical fibre 10000bt-fd
       configuration: autonegotiation=off broadcast=yes driver=mlx4_en driverversion=4.0-0 duplex=full firmware=2.9.1326 ip=192.168.1.1 latency=0 link=yes multicast=yes port=fibre speed=10Gbit/s
       resources: iomemory:24000-23fff irq:481 memory:3fe200000000-3fe2000fffff memory:240000000000-240007ffffff
```

### Ethernet Interface logical names

Interface logical names can also be configured via a Netplan configuration. If you would like control which interface receives a particular logical name use the `match` and `set-name` keys. The `match` key is used to find an adapter based on some criteria like MAC address, driver, etc. The `set-name` key can be used to change the device to the desired logical name.

```
network:
  version: 2
  renderer: networkd
  ethernets:
    eth_lan0:
      dhcp4: true
      match:
        macaddress: 00:11:22:33:44:55
      set-name: eth_lan0
```

### Ethernet Interface settings

`ethtool` is a program that displays and changes Ethernet card settings such as auto-negotiation, port speed, duplex mode, and Wake-on-LAN. The following is an example of how to view the supported features and configured settings of an Ethernet interface.

```
sudo ethtool eth4
Settings for eth4:
    Supported ports: [ FIBRE ]
    Supported link modes:   10000baseT/Full
    Supported pause frame use: No
    Supports auto-negotiation: No
    Supported FEC modes: Not reported
    Advertised link modes:  10000baseT/Full
    Advertised pause frame use: No
    Advertised auto-negotiation: No
    Advertised FEC modes: Not reported
    Speed: 10000Mb/s
    Duplex: Full
    Port: FIBRE
    PHYAD: 0
    Transceiver: internal
    Auto-negotiation: off
    Supports Wake-on: d
    Wake-on: d
    Current message level: 0x00000014 (20)
                   link ifdown
    Link detected: yes
```

## IP addressing

The following section describes the process of configuring your system's IP address and default gateway needed for communicating on a local area network and the Internet.

### Temporary IP address assignment

For temporary network configurations, you can use the `ip` command which is also found on most other {term}`GNU`/Linux operating systems. The `ip` command allows you to configure settings which take effect immediately -- however they are not persistent and will be lost after a reboot.

To temporarily configure an IP address, you can use the `ip` command in the following manner. Modify the IP address and subnet mask to match your network requirements.

```
sudo ip addr add 10.102.66.200/24 dev enp0s25
```

The `ip` can then be used to set the link up or down.

```
ip link set dev enp0s25 up
ip link set dev enp0s25 down
```

To verify the IP address configuration of `enp0s25`, you can use the `ip` command in the following manner:

```
ip address show dev enp0s25
10: enp0s25: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1500 qdisc noqueue state UP group default qlen 1000
    link/ether 00:16:3e:e2:52:42 brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff link-netnsid 0
    inet 10.102.66.200/24 brd 10.102.66.255 scope global dynamic eth0
       valid_lft 2857sec preferred_lft 2857sec
    inet6 fe80::216:3eff:fee2:5242/64 scope link
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever6
```

To configure a default gateway, you can use the `ip` command in the following manner. Modify the default gateway address to match your network requirements.

```
sudo ip route add default via 10.102.66.1
```

You can also use the `ip` command to verify your default gateway configuration, as follows:

```
ip route show
default via 10.102.66.1 dev eth0 proto dhcp src 10.102.66.200 metric 100
10.102.66.0/24 dev eth0 proto kernel scope link src 10.102.66.200
10.102.66.1 dev eth0 proto dhcp scope link src 10.102.66.200 metric 100
```

If you require {term}`DNS` for your temporary network configuration, you can add DNS server IP addresses in the file `/etc/resolv.conf`. In general, editing `/etc/resolv.conf` directly is not recommended, but this is a temporary and non-persistent configuration. The example below shows how to enter two DNS servers to `/etc/resolv.conf`, which should be changed to servers appropriate for your network. A more lengthy description of the proper (persistent) way to do DNS client configuration is in a following section.

```
nameserver 8.8.8.8
nameserver 8.8.4.4
```

If you no longer need this configuration and wish to purge all IP configuration from an interface, you can use the `ip` command with the flush option:

```
ip addr flush eth0
```

```{note}
Flushing the IP configuration using the `ip` command does not clear the contents of `/etc/resolv.conf`. You must remove or modify those entries manually (or re-boot), which should also cause `/etc/resolv.conf`, which is a symlink to `/run/systemd/resolve/stub-resolv.conf`, to be re-written.
```

### Dynamic IP address assignment (DHCP client)

To configure your server to use DHCP for dynamic address assignment, create a Netplan configuration in the file `/etc/netplan/99_config.yaml`. The following example assumes you are configuring your first Ethernet interface identified as `enp3s0`.

```
network:
  version: 2
  renderer: networkd
  ethernets:
    enp3s0:
      dhcp4: true
```

The configuration can then be applied using the `netplan` command:

```
sudo netplan apply
```

### Static IP address assignment

To configure your system to use static address assignment, create a `netplan` configuration in the file `/etc/netplan/99_config.yaml`. The example below assumes you are configuring your first Ethernet interface identified as `eth0`. Change the `addresses`, `routes`, and `nameservers` values to meet the requirements of your network.

```
network:
  version: 2
  renderer: networkd
  ethernets:
    eth0:
      addresses:
        - 10.10.10.2/24
      routes:
        - to: default
          via: 10.10.10.1
      nameservers:
          search: [mydomain, otherdomain]
          addresses: [10.10.10.1, 1.1.1.1]
```

The configuration can then be applied using the `netplan` command.

```
sudo netplan apply
```

```{note}
`netplan` in  Ubuntu Bionic 18.04 LTS doesn't understand the "`to: default`" syntax to specify a default route, and should use the older `gateway4: 10.10.10.1` key instead of the whole `routes:` block.
```

The loopback interface is identified by the system as `lo` and has a default IP address of 127.0.0.1. It can be viewed using the `ip` command.

```
ip address show lo
1: lo: <LOOPBACK,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 65536 qdisc noqueue state UNKNOWN group default qlen 1000
    link/loopback 00:00:00:00:00:00 brd 00:00:00:00:00:00
    inet 127.0.0.1/8 scope host lo
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
    inet6 ::1/128 scope host
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
```

### Adding a virtual IP address

Virtual IP is a method for broadcasting multiple IP addresses to the network. For example, use virtual IP to:

- host multiple web domains using different IP addresses rather than configuring virtual hosts in the web server
- host multiple server names using Samba

Configure virtual IPs by editing your `netplan` configuration found in `/etc/netplan`.

#### Multiple static IP addresses

This example assigns multiple static addresses to a single interface (enter the appropriate values for your server and network):


```yaml
network:
  version: 2
  ethernets:
    eno1:
      addresses:
      - 192.168.0.100/24
        label: eno1:0
      - 192.168.0.101/24
        label: eno1:1

```

Adding labels to the IP addresses allows you to reference the devices by name in configuration files rather than the IP address which can change.

#### Dynamic IP addresses

This example adds one (or more) IP addresses to an interface that also has a dynamic address assigned by DHCP.

```yaml
network:
  version: 2
  ethernets:
    eno1:
      addresses:
      - 192.168.0.101/24
        label: eno1:1
      dhcp4: true

```

:::{note}
A single interface can only have one address assigned by DHCP. To have multiple dynamic addresses, configure multiple interfaces.
:::

#### Apply and verify the IP addresses

- Apply the configuration to enable the virtual IP:

```bash
sudo netplan apply
```

- Verify the IP addresses are available locally using one or more of the following:

```bash
ip addr    #shows all network interfaces

ip addr show <interface_name>    #shows single interface

hostname -i    #shows only the available IP addresses on the host
```

Check the output to see that the addresses were applied to the interface that was configured.

- Verify the IP addresses are available on the network. From a different computer on the network:

```bash
ping 192.168.0.100    #configured IP addresses
ping 192.168.0.101
```
## Name resolution

Name resolution (as it relates to IP networking) is the process of mapping {term}`hostnames <hostname>` to IP addresses, and vice-versa, making it easier to identify resources on a network. The following section will explain how to properly configure your system for name resolution using DNS and static hostname records.

<h3 id="heading--dns-client-configuration">DNS client configuration</h3>

Traditionally, the file `/etc/resolv.conf` was a static configuration file that rarely needed to be changed, or it automatically changed via DHCP client hooks. `systemd-resolved` handles nameserver configuration, and it should be interacted with through the `systemd-resolve` command. Netplan configures `systemd-resolved` to generate a list of nameservers and domains to put in `/etc/resolv.conf`, which is a symlink:

```
/etc/resolv.conf -> ../run/systemd/resolve/stub-resolv.conf
```

To configure the resolver, add the IP addresses of the appropriate nameservers for your network to the `netplan` configuration file. You can also add optional DNS suffix search-lists to match your network domain names. The resulting file might look like the following:

```
network:
  version: 2
  renderer: networkd
  ethernets:
    enp0s25:
      addresses:
        - 192.168.0.100/24
      routes:
        - to: default
          via: 192.168.0.1
      nameservers:
          search: [mydomain, otherdomain]
          addresses: [1.1.1.1, 8.8.8.8, 4.4.4.4]
```

The *search* option can also be used with multiple domain names so that DNS queries will be appended in the order in which they are entered. For example, your network may have multiple sub-domains to search; a parent domain of *`example.com`*, and two sub-domains, *`sales.example.com`* and *`dev.example.com`*.

If you have multiple domains you wish to search, your configuration might look like the following:

```
network:
  version: 2
  renderer: networkd
  ethernets:
    enp0s25:
      addresses:
        - 192.168.0.100/24
      routes:
        - to: default
          via: 192.168.0.1
      nameservers:
          search: [example.com, sales.example.com, dev.example.com]
          addresses: [1.1.1.1, 8.8.8.8, 4.4.4.4]
```

If you try to ping a host with the name `server1`, your system will automatically query DNS for its {term}`Fully Qualified Domain Name (FQDN) <FQDN>` in the following order:

1.  `server1.example.com`

2.  `server1.sales.example.com`

3.  `server1.dev.example.com`

If no matches are found, the DNS server will provide a result of *`notfound`* and the DNS query will fail.

### Static hostnames

Static hostnames are locally defined hostname-to-IP mappings located in the file `/etc/hosts`. Entries in the `hosts` file will have precedence over DNS by default. This means that if your system tries to resolve a hostname and it matches an entry in `/etc/hosts`, it will not attempt to look up the record in DNS. In some configurations, especially when Internet access is not required, servers that communicate with a limited number of resources can be conveniently set to use static hostnames instead of DNS.

The following is an example of a `hosts` file where a number of local servers have been identified by simple hostnames, aliases and their equivalent Fully Qualified Domain Names (FQDN's):

```
127.0.0.1   localhost
127.0.1.1   ubuntu-server
10.0.0.11   server1 server1.example.com vpn
10.0.0.12   server2 server2.example.com mail
10.0.0.13   server3 server3.example.com www
10.0.0.14   server4 server4.example.com file
```

```{note}
In this example, notice that each of the servers were given aliases in addition to their proper names and FQDN's. *Server1* has been mapped to the name *vpn*, *server2* is referred to as *mail*, *server3* as *www*, and *server4* as *file*.
```

### Name Service Switch (NSS) configuration

The order in which your system selects a method of resolving hostnames to IP addresses is controlled by the Name Service Switch (NSS) configuration file `/etc/nsswitch.conf`. As mentioned in the previous section, typically static hostnames defined in the systems `/etc/hosts` file have precedence over names resolved from DNS. The following is an example of the line responsible for this order of hostname lookups in the file `/etc/nsswitch.conf`.

```
hosts:          files mdns4_minimal [NOTFOUND=return] dns mdns4
```

- **`files`** first tries to resolve static hostnames located in `/etc/hosts`.

- **`mdns4_minimal`** attempts to resolve the name using Multicast DNS.

- **`[NOTFOUND=return]`** means that any response of `notfound` by the preceding `mdns4_minimal` process should be treated as authoritative and that the system should not try to continue hunting for an answer.

- **`dns`** represents a legacy unicast DNS query.

- **mdns4** represents a multicast DNS query.

To modify the order of these name resolution methods, you can simply change the `hosts:` string to the value of your choosing. For example, if you prefer to use legacy unicast DNS versus multicast DNS, you can change the string in `/etc/nsswitch.conf` as shown below:

```
hosts:          files dns [NOTFOUND=return] mdns4_minimal mdns4
```
## Bridging multiple interfaces

Bridging is a more advanced configuration, but is very useful in multiple scenarios. One scenario is setting up a bridge with multiple network interfaces, then using a firewall to filter traffic between two network segments. Another scenario is using bridge on a system with one interface to allow virtual machines direct access to the outside network. The following example covers the latter scenario:

Configure the bridge by editing your `netplan` configuration found in `/etc/netplan/`, entering the appropriate values for your physical interface and network:

```
network:
  version: 2
  renderer: networkd
  ethernets:
    enp3s0:
      dhcp4: no
  bridges:
    br0:
      dhcp4: yes
      interfaces:
        - enp3s0
```

Now apply the configuration to enable the bridge:

```
sudo netplan apply
```

The new bridge interface should now be up and running. The `brctl` provides useful information about the state of the bridge, controls which interfaces are part of the bridge, etc. See `man brctl` for more information.

## networkd-dispatcher for hook scripts

Users of the former  `ifupdown` may be familiar with using hook scripts (e.g., pre-up, post-up) in their interfaces file. [Netplan configuration](https://netplan.readthedocs.io/en/stable/netplan-yaml/) does not currently support hook scripts in its configuration definition.

Instead, to achieve this functionality with the `networkd` renderer, users can use {manpage}`networkd-dispatcher(8)`. The package provides both users and packages with hook points when specific network states are reached, to aid in reacting to network state.

```{note}
If you are on Desktop (not Ubuntu Server) the network is driven by Network Manager - in that case you need [NM Dispatcher scripts](https://networkmanager.dev/docs/api/latest/) instead.
```

The [Netplan FAQ has a great table](https://netplan.io/faq/) that compares event timings between `ifupdown`/`systemd-networkd`/`network-manager`.

It is important to be aware that these hooks run asynchronously; i.e. they will not block transition into another state.

The [Netplan FAQ also has an example](https://netplan.io/faq/) on converting an old `ifupdown` hook to `networkd-dispatcher`.

## Resources

  - The [Ubuntu Wiki Network page](https://help.ubuntu.com/community/Network) has links to articles covering more advanced network configuration.

  - The [Netplan website](https://netplan.io) has additional [examples](https://netplan.readthedocs.io/en/stable/netplan-yaml/#) and documentation.

  - The Netplan {manpage}`manual page <netplan(5)>` has more information on Netplan.

  - The {manpage}`systemd-resolved(8)` manual page has more information on `systemd-resolved` service.

  - For more information on *bridging* see the [netplan.io examples page](https://netplan.readthedocs.io/en/stable/netplan-yaml/#properties-for-device-type-bridges)

Commit message:

Clarify uses for virtual ip
**configuring-networks.md**
- Add that virtual IP is used on single network interface
- Fix wording of website virtual host usage

docs/explanation/networking/configuring-networks.md, after:

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    description: "Learn about network configuration options on Ubuntu Server, including Netplan, interfaces, and network management approaches."
---

(configuring-networks)=
# Configuring networks

Network configuration on Ubuntu is handled through [Netplan](https://netplan.io/), which provides a high-level, distribution-agnostic way to define how the network on your system should be set up via a [YAML configuration file](https://netplan.readthedocs.io/en/stable/netplan-yaml/).

While Netplan is a configuration abstraction renderer that covers all aspects of network configuration, here we will outline the underlying system elements like IP addresses, Ethernet devices, name resolution and so on. We will refer to the related Netplan settings where appropriate, but we do recommend studying [the Netplan documentation](https://netplan.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) in general.

## Ethernet interfaces

Ethernet interfaces are identified by the system using predictable network interface names. These names can appear as `eno1` or `enp0s25`. However, in some cases an interface may still use the kernel *eth\#* style of naming.

### Identify Ethernet interfaces

To quickly identify all available Ethernet interfaces, you can use the `ip` command as shown below.

```
ip a
1: lo: <LOOPBACK,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 65536 qdisc noqueue state UNKNOWN group default qlen 1000
    link/loopback 00:00:00:00:00:00 brd 00:00:00:00:00:00
    inet 127.0.0.1/8 scope host lo
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
    inet6 ::1/128 scope host
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
2: enp0s25: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1500 qdisc noqueue state UP group default qlen 1000
    link/ether 00:16:3e:e2:52:42 brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff link-netnsid 0
    inet 10.102.66.200/24 brd 10.102.66.255 scope global dynamic eth0
       valid_lft 3257sec preferred_lft 3257sec
    inet6 fe80::216:3eff:fee2:5242/64 scope link
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
```

Another application that can help identify all network interfaces available to your system is the `lshw` command. This command provides greater details around the hardware capabilities of specific adapters. In the example below, `lshw` shows a single Ethernet interface with the logical name of *eth4* along with bus information, driver details and all supported capabilities.

```
sudo lshw -class network
  *-network
       description: Ethernet interface
       product: MT26448 [ConnectX EN 10GigE, PCIe 2.0 5GT/s]
       vendor: Mellanox Technologies
       physical id: 0
       bus info: pci@0004:01:00.0
       logical name: eth4
       version: b0
       serial: e4:1d:2d:67:83:56
       slot: U78CB.001.WZS09KB-P1-C6-T1
       size: 10Gbit/s
       capacity: 10Gbit/s
       width: 64 bits
       clock: 33MHz
       capabilities: pm vpd msix pciexpress bus_master cap_list ethernet physical fibre 10000bt-fd
       configuration: autonegotiation=off broadcast=yes driver=mlx4_en driverversion=4.0-0 duplex=full firmware=2.9.1326 ip=192.168.1.1 latency=0 link=yes multicast=yes port=fibre speed=10Gbit/s
       resources: iomemory:24000-23fff irq:481 memory:3fe200000000-3fe2000fffff memory:240000000000-240007ffffff
```

### Ethernet Interface logical names

Interface logical names can also be configured via a Netplan configuration. If you would like control which interface receives a particular logical name use the `match` and `set-name` keys. The `match` key is used to find an adapter based on some criteria like MAC address, driver, etc. The `set-name` key can be used to change the device to the desired logical name.

```
network:
  version: 2
  renderer: networkd
  ethernets:
    eth_lan0:
      dhcp4: true
      match:
        macaddress: 00:11:22:33:44:55
      set-name: eth_lan0
```

### Ethernet Interface settings

`ethtool` is a program that displays and changes Ethernet card settings such as auto-negotiation, port speed, duplex mode, and Wake-on-LAN. The following is an example of how to view the supported features and configured settings of an Ethernet interface.

```
sudo ethtool eth4
Settings for eth4:
    Supported ports: [ FIBRE ]
    Supported link modes:   10000baseT/Full
    Supported pause frame use: No
    Supports auto-negotiation: No
    Supported FEC modes: Not reported
    Advertised link modes:  10000baseT/Full
    Advertised pause frame use: No
    Advertised auto-negotiation: No
    Advertised FEC modes: Not reported
    Speed: 10000Mb/s
    Duplex: Full
    Port: FIBRE
    PHYAD: 0
    Transceiver: internal
    Auto-negotiation: off
    Supports Wake-on: d
    Wake-on: d
    Current message level: 0x00000014 (20)
                   link ifdown
    Link detected: yes
```

## IP addressing

The following section describes the process of configuring your system's IP address and default gateway needed for communicating on a local area network and the Internet.

### Temporary IP address assignment

For temporary network configurations, you can use the `ip` command which is also found on most other {term}`GNU`/Linux operating systems. The `ip` command allows you to configure settings which take effect immediately -- however they are not persistent and will be lost after a reboot.

To temporarily configure an IP address, you can use the `ip` command in the following manner. Modify the IP address and subnet mask to match your network requirements.

```
sudo ip addr add 10.102.66.200/24 dev enp0s25
```

The `ip` can then be used to set the link up or down.

```
ip link set dev enp0s25 up
ip link set dev enp0s25 down
```

To verify the IP address configuration of `enp0s25`, you can use the `ip` command in the following manner:

```
ip address show dev enp0s25
10: enp0s25: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1500 qdisc noqueue state UP group default qlen 1000
    link/ether 00:16:3e:e2:52:42 brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff link-netnsid 0
    inet 10.102.66.200/24 brd 10.102.66.255 scope global dynamic eth0
       valid_lft 2857sec preferred_lft 2857sec
    inet6 fe80::216:3eff:fee2:5242/64 scope link
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever6
```

To configure a default gateway, you can use the `ip` command in the following manner. Modify the default gateway address to match your network requirements.

```
sudo ip route add default via 10.102.66.1
```

You can also use the `ip` command to verify your default gateway configuration, as follows:

```
ip route show
default via 10.102.66.1 dev eth0 proto dhcp src 10.102.66.200 metric 100
10.102.66.0/24 dev eth0 proto kernel scope link src 10.102.66.200
10.102.66.1 dev eth0 proto dhcp scope link src 10.102.66.200 metric 100
```

If you require {term}`DNS` for your temporary network configuration, you can add DNS server IP addresses in the file `/etc/resolv.conf`. In general, editing `/etc/resolv.conf` directly is not recommended, but this is a temporary and non-persistent configuration. The example below shows how to enter two DNS servers to `/etc/resolv.conf`, which should be changed to servers appropriate for your network. A more lengthy description of the proper (persistent) way to do DNS client configuration is in a following section.

```
nameserver 8.8.8.8
nameserver 8.8.4.4
```

If you no longer need this configuration and wish to purge all IP configuration from an interface, you can use the `ip` command with the flush option:

```
ip addr flush eth0
```

```{note}
Flushing the IP configuration using the `ip` command does not clear the contents of `/etc/resolv.conf`. You must remove or modify those entries manually (or re-boot), which should also cause `/etc/resolv.conf`, which is a symlink to `/run/systemd/resolve/stub-resolv.conf`, to be re-written.
```

### Dynamic IP address assignment (DHCP client)

To configure your server to use DHCP for dynamic address assignment, create a Netplan configuration in the file `/etc/netplan/99_config.yaml`. The following example assumes you are configuring your first Ethernet interface identified as `enp3s0`.

```
network:
  version: 2
  renderer: networkd
  ethernets:
    enp3s0:
      dhcp4: true
```

The configuration can then be applied using the `netplan` command:

```
sudo netplan apply
```

### Static IP address assignment

To configure your system to use static address assignment, create a `netplan` configuration in the file `/etc/netplan/99_config.yaml`. The example below assumes you are configuring your first Ethernet interface identified as `eth0`. Change the `addresses`, `routes`, and `nameservers` values to meet the requirements of your network.

```
network:
  version: 2
  renderer: networkd
  ethernets:
    eth0:
      addresses:
        - 10.10.10.2/24
      routes:
        - to: default
          via: 10.10.10.1
      nameservers:
          search: [mydomain, otherdomain]
          addresses: [10.10.10.1, 1.1.1.1]
```

The configuration can then be applied using the `netplan` command.

```
sudo netplan apply
```

```{note}
`netplan` in  Ubuntu Bionic 18.04 LTS doesn't understand the "`to: default`" syntax to specify a default route, and should use the older `gateway4: 10.10.10.1` key instead of the whole `routes:` block.
```

The loopback interface is identified by the system as `lo` and has a default IP address of 127.0.0.1. It can be viewed using the `ip` command.

```
ip address show lo
1: lo: <LOOPBACK,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 65536 qdisc noqueue state UNKNOWN group default qlen 1000
    link/loopback 00:00:00:00:00:00 brd 00:00:00:00:00:00
    inet 127.0.0.1/8 scope host lo
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
    inet6 ::1/128 scope host
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
```

### Adding a virtual IP address

Virtual IP is a method for broadcasting multiple IP addresses to the network *on a single network interface*. For example, configuring a single network interface, use virtual IP to:

- host multiple web domains by configuring virtual hosts using different IP addresses rather than server names
- host multiple server names using Samba

Configure virtual IPs by editing your `netplan` configuration found in `/etc/netplan`.

#### Multiple static IP addresses

This example assigns multiple static addresses to a single interface (enter the appropriate values for your server and network):


```yaml
network:
  version: 2
  ethernets:
    eno1:
      addresses:
      - 192.168.0.100/24
        label: eno1:0
      - 192.168.0.101/24
        label: eno1:1

```

Adding labels to the IP addresses allows you to reference the devices by name in configuration files rather than the IP address which can change.

#### Dynamic IP addresses

This example adds one (or more) IP addresses to an interface that also has a dynamic address assigned by DHCP.

```yaml
network:
  version: 2
  ethernets:
    eno1:
      addresses:
      - 192.168.0.101/24
        label: eno1:1
      dhcp4: true

```

:::{note}
A single interface can only have one address assigned by DHCP. To have multiple dynamic addresses, configure multiple interfaces.
:::

#### Apply and verify the IP addresses

- Apply the configuration to enable the virtual IP:

```bash
sudo netplan apply
```

- Verify the IP addresses are available locally using one or more of the following:

```bash
ip addr    #shows all network interfaces

ip addr show <interface_name>    #shows single interface

hostname -i    #shows only the available IP addresses on the host
```

Check the output to see that the addresses were applied to the interface that was configured.

- Verify the IP addresses are available on the network. From a different computer on the network:

```bash
ping 192.168.0.100    #configured IP addresses
ping 192.168.0.101
```
## Name resolution

Name resolution (as it relates to IP networking) is the process of mapping {term}`hostnames <hostname>` to IP addresses, and vice-versa, making it easier to identify resources on a network. The following section will explain how to properly configure your system for name resolution using DNS and static hostname records.

<h3 id="heading--dns-client-configuration">DNS client configuration</h3>

Traditionally, the file `/etc/resolv.conf` was a static configuration file that rarely needed to be changed, or it automatically changed via DHCP client hooks. `systemd-resolved` handles nameserver configuration, and it should be interacted with through the `systemd-resolve` command. Netplan configures `systemd-resolved` to generate a list of nameservers and domains to put in `/etc/resolv.conf`, which is a symlink:

```
/etc/resolv.conf -> ../run/systemd/resolve/stub-resolv.conf
```

To configure the resolver, add the IP addresses of the appropriate nameservers for your network to the `netplan` configuration file. You can also add optional DNS suffix search-lists to match your network domain names. The resulting file might look like the following:

```
network:
  version: 2
  renderer: networkd
  ethernets:
    enp0s25:
      addresses:
        - 192.168.0.100/24
      routes:
        - to: default
          via: 192.168.0.1
      nameservers:
          search: [mydomain, otherdomain]
          addresses: [1.1.1.1, 8.8.8.8, 4.4.4.4]
```

The *search* option can also be used with multiple domain names so that DNS queries will be appended in the order in which they are entered. For example, your network may have multiple sub-domains to search; a parent domain of *`example.com`*, and two sub-domains, *`sales.example.com`* and *`dev.example.com`*.

If you have multiple domains you wish to search, your configuration might look like the following:

```
network:
  version: 2
  renderer: networkd
  ethernets:
    enp0s25:
      addresses:
        - 192.168.0.100/24
      routes:
        - to: default
          via: 192.168.0.1
      nameservers:
          search: [example.com, sales.example.com, dev.example.com]
          addresses: [1.1.1.1, 8.8.8.8, 4.4.4.4]
```

If you try to ping a host with the name `server1`, your system will automatically query DNS for its {term}`Fully Qualified Domain Name (FQDN) <FQDN>` in the following order:

1.  `server1.example.com`

2.  `server1.sales.example.com`

3.  `server1.dev.example.com`

If no matches are found, the DNS server will provide a result of *`notfound`* and the DNS query will fail.

### Static hostnames

Static hostnames are locally defined hostname-to-IP mappings located in the file `/etc/hosts`. Entries in the `hosts` file will have precedence over DNS by default. This means that if your system tries to resolve a hostname and it matches an entry in `/etc/hosts`, it will not attempt to look up the record in DNS. In some configurations, especially when Internet access is not required, servers that communicate with a limited number of resources can be conveniently set to use static hostnames instead of DNS.

The following is an example of a `hosts` file where a number of local servers have been identified by simple hostnames, aliases and their equivalent Fully Qualified Domain Names (FQDN's):

```
127.0.0.1   localhost
127.0.1.1   ubuntu-server
10.0.0.11   server1 server1.example.com vpn
10.0.0.12   server2 server2.example.com mail
10.0.0.13   server3 server3.example.com www
10.0.0.14   server4 server4.example.com file
```

```{note}
In this example, notice that each of the servers were given aliases in addition to their proper names and FQDN's. *Server1* has been mapped to the name *vpn*, *server2* is referred to as *mail*, *server3* as *www*, and *server4* as *file*.
```

### Name Service Switch (NSS) configuration

The order in which your system selects a method of resolving hostnames to IP addresses is controlled by the Name Service Switch (NSS) configuration file `/etc/nsswitch.conf`. As mentioned in the previous section, typically static hostnames defined in the systems `/etc/hosts` file have precedence over names resolved from DNS. The following is an example of the line responsible for this order of hostname lookups in the file `/etc/nsswitch.conf`.

```
hosts:          files mdns4_minimal [NOTFOUND=return] dns mdns4
```

- **`files`** first tries to resolve static hostnames located in `/etc/hosts`.

- **`mdns4_minimal`** attempts to resolve the name using Multicast DNS.

- **`[NOTFOUND=return]`** means that any response of `notfound` by the preceding `mdns4_minimal` process should be treated as authoritative and that the system should not try to continue hunting for an answer.

- **`dns`** represents a legacy unicast DNS query.

- **mdns4** represents a multicast DNS query.

To modify the order of these name resolution methods, you can simply change the `hosts:` string to the value of your choosing. For example, if you prefer to use legacy unicast DNS versus multicast DNS, you can change the string in `/etc/nsswitch.conf` as shown below:

```
hosts:          files dns [NOTFOUND=return] mdns4_minimal mdns4
```
## Bridging multiple interfaces

Bridging is a more advanced configuration, but is very useful in multiple scenarios. One scenario is setting up a bridge with multiple network interfaces, then using a firewall to filter traffic between two network segments. Another scenario is using bridge on a system with one interface to allow virtual machines direct access to the outside network. The following example covers the latter scenario:

Configure the bridge by editing your `netplan` configuration found in `/etc/netplan/`, entering the appropriate values for your physical interface and network:

```
network:
  version: 2
  renderer: networkd
  ethernets:
    enp3s0:
      dhcp4: no
  bridges:
    br0:
      dhcp4: yes
      interfaces:
        - enp3s0
```

Now apply the configuration to enable the bridge:

```
sudo netplan apply
```

The new bridge interface should now be up and running. The `brctl` provides useful information about the state of the bridge, controls which interfaces are part of the bridge, etc. See `man brctl` for more information.

## networkd-dispatcher for hook scripts

Users of the former  `ifupdown` may be familiar with using hook scripts (e.g., pre-up, post-up) in their interfaces file. [Netplan configuration](https://netplan.readthedocs.io/en/stable/netplan-yaml/) does not currently support hook scripts in its configuration definition.

Instead, to achieve this functionality with the `networkd` renderer, users can use {manpage}`networkd-dispatcher(8)`. The package provides both users and packages with hook points when specific network states are reached, to aid in reacting to network state.

```{note}
If you are on Desktop (not Ubuntu Server) the network is driven by Network Manager - in that case you need [NM Dispatcher scripts](https://networkmanager.dev/docs/api/latest/) instead.
```

The [Netplan FAQ has a great table](https://netplan.io/faq/) that compares event timings between `ifupdown`/`systemd-networkd`/`network-manager`.

It is important to be aware that these hooks run asynchronously; i.e. they will not block transition into another state.

The [Netplan FAQ also has an example](https://netplan.io/faq/) on converting an old `ifupdown` hook to `networkd-dispatcher`.

## Resources

  - The [Ubuntu Wiki Network page](https://help.ubuntu.com/community/Network) has links to articles covering more advanced network configuration.

  - The [Netplan website](https://netplan.io) has additional [examples](https://netplan.readthedocs.io/en/stable/netplan-yaml/#) and documentation.

  - The Netplan {manpage}`manual page <netplan(5)>` has more information on Netplan.

  - The {manpage}`systemd-resolved(8)` manual page has more information on `systemd-resolved` service.

  - For more information on *bridging* see the [netplan.io examples page](https://netplan.readthedocs.io/en/stable/netplan-yaml/#properties-for-device-type-bridges)
