explanation/intro-to/mail-services.md, before:

(introduction-to-mail-services)=
# Introduction to mail servers

The process of getting an email from one person to another over a network or the Internet involves many systems working together. Each of these systems must be correctly configured for the process to work. 

The sender uses a *Mail User Agent* (MUA), or email client, to send the message through one or more *Mail Transfer Agents* (MTA), the last of which will hand it off to a *Mail Delivery Agent* (MDA) for delivery to the recipient's mailbox, from which it will be retrieved by the recipient's email client, usually via a POP3 or IMAP server.

## Mail User Agent 

* **Thunderbird**
  The default MUA used by Ubuntu is [Thunderbird](https://www.thunderbird.net/). It comes pre-installed on all Ubuntu machines from Ubuntu 16.04 LTS (Xenial) onwards.
  
  If you need to install Thunderbird manually, [this short guide](https://snapcraft.io/install/thunderbird/ubuntu) will walk you through the steps. 

## Mail Transfer Agent

* **Postfix**
  On Ubuntu, [Postfix](https://www.postfix.org/) is the default supported MTA. It aims to be fast and secure, with flexibility in administration. It is compatible with the [sendmail](https://www.authsmtp.com/sendmail/index.html) MTA. 
  
  This guide explains {ref}`how to install and configure Postfix <install-postfix>`, including how to configure SMTP for secure communications.

* **Exim4**
  [Exim4](https://www.exim.org/) was developed at the University of Cambridge for use on Unix systems connected to the Internet. Exim can be installed in place of sendmail, although its configuration is quite different. 
  
  This guide explains {ref}`how to install and configure Exim4 <install-exim4>` on Ubuntu.

## Mail Delivery Agent

* **Dovecot**
  [Dovecot](https://www.dovecot.org/) is an MDA written with security primarily in mind. It supports the [mbox](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mbox) and [Maildir](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maildir) mailbox formats. 
  
  This guide explains {ref}`how to set up Dovecot <install-dovecot>` as an IMAP or POP3 server.

Commit message:

First pass plain language proofreading for intro docs (#147)
First pass on plain language proofreading:
- Changed to "synchronize" (US spelling)
- Removed some line breaks, rewrote OVS line with suggestion from Sally.
- Formatted "chrony" the same way as the other tools in that section.
- included Sally's wording feedback
- Minor edits to remove parenthetical phrases.
- Added additional context to first section, made back-up utilities into a table.

---------

Co-authored-by: Sally <sally.makin@canonical.com>

explanation/intro-to/mail-services.md, after:

(introduction-to-mail-services)=
# Introduction to mail servers

Sending email from one person to another over a network or the Internet requires many systems to work together. First, the sender's email client (**Mail User Agent**) sends the message. Then one or more **Mail Transfer Agents** (MTA) transfers the message. The final MTA sends the message to a **Mail Delivery Agent** (MDA) for delivery to the recipient's inbox. Finally, the recipient's email client retrieves the message, usually via a **POP3** or **IMAP** server. These systems must all be configured correctly to successfully deliver a message.

## Mail User Agent

### Thunderbird

[Thunderbird](https://www.thunderbird.net/) is the default Mail User Agent (email client) used by Ubuntu. It comes pre-installed on all Ubuntu machines from Ubuntu 16.04 LTS (Xenial) onwards.
  
  If you need to install Thunderbird manually, [this short guide](https://snapcraft.io/install/thunderbird/ubuntu) will walk you through the steps. 

## Mail Transfer Agent

### Postfix

On Ubuntu, [Postfix](https://www.postfix.org/) is the default supported MTA. It aims to be fast and secure, with flexibility in administration. It is compatible with the [sendmail](https://www.authsmtp.com/sendmail/index.html) MTA.  
  
  This guide explains {ref}`how to install and configure Postfix <install-postfix>`, including how to configure SMTP for secure communications.

### Exim4

[Exim4](https://www.exim.org/) was developed at the University of Cambridge for use on Unix systems connected to the Internet. Exim can be installed in place of sendmail, although its configuration is quite different. 
  
  This guide explains {ref}`how to install and configure Exim4 <install-exim4>` on Ubuntu.

## Mail Delivery Agent

### Dovecot
[Dovecot](https://www.dovecot.org/) is an MDA written with security primarily in mind. It supports the [mbox](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mbox) and [Maildir](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maildir) mailbox formats. 
  
  This guide explains {ref}`how to set up Dovecot <install-dovecot>` as an IMAP or POP3 server.
